The market right now is implying there's
going to be two companies that basically
build the future of software uh
anthropic and open AI. And this fear we
believe is greatly overexaggerated.
>> Hi everyone, I'm Miriam Gotthried and
joining me today is my colleague on the
street tech columnist Dan Gallagher. Hi
Dan.
>> Hey, how's it going?
>> It's going well. Glad to have you on. So
Dan, I am old enough to remember when
business software, also known as
software as a service or SAS, was one of
the hottest sectors, but it's been kind
of having a rough go of it recently um
because of fears that AI will sort of
replace the need for business computing
software.
Um what have you been seeing out there,
Dan? Uh well, you're exactly right that
fear is out there. And I'm actually old
enough to remember before we had
software as a service when software
really big the stuff that was like
installed on a on a company's like
premises on their own servers, you know,
and we saw that transition happen.
>> Um you know, a lot of the older
companies ended up like consolidating or
getting bought out and then these the
what we call cloud software companies
came in. Um what we're seeing now is
this fear that these AI tools, stuff
made by Anthropic and OpenAI, um will
enable big companies to essentially
produce their own software. And if that
happens, why would they buy expensive
software subscriptions from big
companies like Salesforce and Workday or
smaller companies? There's lots of
companies in the space. And so you're
seeing that disintermediation fear
really kick in. And this um as one
indicator this there's a s this index
called the IGV index that's really
closely tracked is already down in the
first like six weeks of this year has
already lost more than 20%. Um by far
the worst hit of all the of all the tech
sub sectors.
>> So we want to dig into this subject a
little more which is why we invited
somebody who follows this very closely
and that is Jeffre software analyst
Brent Phil. Brent thanks for joining us.
Thanks for having me.
>> So Brent, you've written a lot about
how, you know, you think that kind of
the AI fears are a little bit overblown.
What do you think the market is missing?
>> The market right now is implying there's
going to be two companies that basically
build the future of software, uh,
anthropic and open AI. And this fear we
believe is greatly overexaggerated. For
the last 30 years, uh, many enterprises
have relied on hundreds of software
companies, not not two. They want
backups. They don't want one vendor
ruling all. You have to deal with
security, workflow, process flow,
where's the data coming from, who gets
access. There's there's an intricate
list of details. And so it's not that
you know we can do this at home or a
small business could do this where they
create uh an application in claude or uh
open AI
those businesses can do that but the
large enterprises really can't do that
uh for for a lot of reasons and so we
think that the there's a better option
for them to partner rather than replace.
There are a lot of companies in this
group um and you know many do things
that are pretty niche and that you know
most of us have no idea what they do for
quite honestly and it would be hard for
us to figure it out and this complexity
seems to kind of work against the group.
Are people just kind of selling the
index because they can't figure out
which companies will win and which
companies will lose.
>> Exactly. I think the winners are pretty
clear it's infrastructure, right? You
need the agents are going to need
somewhere to live as we said. They they
need a home. They need to bathe. They
need to have social interaction. They
they need an infrastructure, right? So
you look at Microsoft, Amazon, AWS,
Google, uh Oracle, these big
infrastructure platforms, it doesn't
really matter what happens to agents.
They're going to need a place to live.
That is, in our opinion, a very safe
place to be uh and and a safe bet over
the next 5 years that those platforms
will be around. I think that the trouble
is the rest of the industry. If you
build a website, if you're Wix or
GoDaddy, if you go into horizontal SAS,
ultimately what's going to happen there?
If you're a work management product like
Monday or ASA, could uh this be
replicated by uh an employee using one
of these tools in a in a small division
of a company? That those are uh the
bigger risk factors. So I think what
we've done is we've weighted it and seen
where we think there's a a a greater
risk and where we don't believe there's
any risk and we we've effectively try to
go at it from from that perspective.
>> Given the diversity of companies in this
group, it's true that some are going to
be more irreplaceable than others. In
general, you know, as an investor, how
should we think about what are the
characteristics of a company that would
be more defensible or more vulnerable
when it comes to AI?
I think there's a view right now where
infrastructure is is a place to be. I
think the other area is security. So
when you think about you're magnifying
the number of available applications,
the security issues are going to go uh
are going to be incredibly uh diverse
and there are going to be a lot more uh
intrusions and uh breaches. And so my
prediction in the next year, you're
going to see some of these uh AI apps
built and they're going to get
effectively um uh you know impacted
materially and there's going to be a
major breach. I think that companies um
like Cloudflare, Pala Networks, Crowd
Strike will be there to secure these
agents to ensure that the they're not
doing the wrong thing. So I think that
in our view right now the application
category is the one that's still the
most concerning. The infrastructure and
security we have no concern that they're
going to be massively disrupted because
it's critical infrastructure. You can't
do it. The also thing you got to take
into account is many of these software
companies you would have to assume for
them to die that they're doing nothing.
Um and I'll take an example in it. It's
an application company. It's been hit
extra hard. Many of you know them for
building Turboax and and and Quicken.
>> Many people are working on their Turbo
taxes right now probably.
>> Right. So, this stock has been hit
extremely hard. The fear is that OpenAI
is going to do our taxes and that you're
going to go to Claude and recreate your
software for Judy's flower shop and
Bill's Automotive and these, you know,
one to nine employee companies are going
to effectively just vibe code and build
their own suite.
>> Can you quickly define what Vibe coding
is for those who don't know?
Yeah, VIP coding is effectively you pull
up uh a dashboard and in the past you
had to actually no code. Uh you had to
be trained and you'd actually have to
look at the code and now you can say
with real kind of easy language prompt
the system to say build me an invoice
system for my idle part business. Build
me a customer service so that when
Miriam has bought flowers I can send her
a thank you note. So, I think the fear
again that you're going to vibe code as
a small business and you're going to
have CHB due to your taxes um is is is
wrong. And you look at Intuit is an
application company that everyone thinks
is going to get crushed based on how the
stock is acting. LMS are in these vibe
coding systems are useless without the
data. Intuit has billions of data points
in the system. Third is an application
user interface. So you have to sit in
the app. You actually have to do the
job. So I think right now we're in a
situation where investors are
misunderstanding
there's a problem. So every everyone's
yelling get out of the pool. Everyone's
getting out of the pool. And I've said
it's we're in a hail storm. Um there's
no reason to be outside. I could yell as
loud as I want right now about why it's
fundamentally not the right fundamental
component, but right now the the overall
um concern is outweighing the actual
fundamentals.
>> I want to talk a little bit more about
what you said about how there are other
factors that are affecting software
right now apart from AI. And Dan, you've
written a lot about this. You've written
about how these companies are facing,
you know, all these AI questions at a
time when they're already being enforced
to to invest in their own AI initiatives
and are spending a lot of money. So Dan,
maybe you can talk a little bit about
the other reasons for why software
growth is slow this year.
>> What investors want to see is have these
companies prove that they're not getting
disrupted by AI. And the only way they
can really do that is accelerate revenue
growth, accelerate buildings growth, and
so forth. And right now I think it's a
very tough time for companies to do that
even if they're not really getting
disrupted because they they're selling
to big customers who are who are
investigating their own AI efforts
devoting budget dollars and attention to
that. Um you've got like large scale
corporate layoffs going on around which
can affect seat count of big customers
and that can have an impact on what your
growth rate can be. So there's there's
other factors that can be impacting a
company's ability to essentially prove
that they're not being disrupted. So
investors have this narrative in their
head that okay, these companies are all
going to get killed by um by AI and if
their reports are kind of showing like
well growth is decelerating and maybe
it's because of these other reasons, I I
don't think there's a lot of inclination
to give them the benefit of the doubt um
at the moment. So that's where it's like
a tough period because I think one I
think the companies that prove
themselves resilient
um will, you know, eventually start to
show that in their numbers. Um but
that's going to be a hard thing to do in
the near term, I think, for most of
these companies.
>> Brent, what do you think about that?
Like is that sort of part of your
calculus for why you think people should
sort of wait right now?
>> Yeah, Dan brought up a lot of great
points. We're we're seeing a lot of
layoffs, so less seat count. We're going
through a model that the software
industry is based on seats and it's
moving to consumption. I think it's
going to move to seats and consumption
because CIOS can't manage the spend if
it's just pure consumption. So I think
we're going through a business model.
>> So can you explain seats is sort of like
pay you pay per person who uses that
software.
>> That's right.
>> And then consumption is like each time
you log in you pay or something. How
does that work?
>> Yeah. use you as you use the system as
you hit queries on the system you get
paid it's like a it's like a toll bridge
um more you go over it the more you pay
>> um so I think the industry is yeah
shifting you know the the the
monetization model from just pure seats
uh you look at salesforce.com right they
have a seat model on how many sales
seats you buy and service seats but then
they have an what's called agent force
so they're AI agent where they'll
they'll base that on capacity number of
of requests that are done I think think
the industry is going to go to agents
actually doing the work. So, um where
you're not just paying for consumption,
you're actually paying for a successful
outcome. I mean, how many times you've
called an airline and been disappointed,
right? At the end of the call, you're
like happy or sad
>> all the time,
>> right? But if you're if you if you go
through and the agent actually does a
great job and and you give it a thumbs
up, they should get paid on that
transaction. All the other ones they
shouldn't get paid on. We're going to
take a quick break and when we come back
we'll have more with Jeffrey's analyst
Brent Phil.
>> One thing I was thinking of is as we
were talking about what companies are
going to prove what kind of businesses
will prove defensible in this new era or
not. I was thinking about um one the
example you were talking about Brent of
of into it and thinking okay if there's
a if I'm a small business let's say I
throw all my financial docs into uh into
one of these chat bots and say do my
taxes for this year and it spits out you
know very legible tax forms and
everything I file them something's wrong
um and and it occurs to me that maybe
the companies behind these chat bots are
not going to be take responsibility for
that if if something messed up within
that and I'm thinking part of the
defensibility I think for these
companies to prove out the intuit of the
world and whatn not is is the ability to
be a trusted source I think for like
essentially business critical
tasks. How do companies like prove that
story do you think?
>> Well I think it's a great point. So, uh,
today Intuitit for example partners with
OpenAI and OpenAI when you say start my
taxes it'll say I can help start collect
your documents but I can't file. You
have to go to Intuitit. So here's an
example of OpenAI and Intuit are better
together, right? It's great for OpenAI
because they're getting requests. It's
great for Intuit because they're they're
it makes it easier for us as consumers
to bring documents in. But they you
can't file with AI. What if you and what
if you could? What if it was wrong?
you're either going to get fined by the
IRS or you're going to go to jail. Like,
why would you want to take the risk?
Same thing in small business accounting.
Why would you want to vibe code or let
the AI system recreate your accounting
system when if you get the followings
wrong, you're going to face massive
consequences as a business. So, I think
there's going to be areas where AI is
safer to play with and areas that you
won't touch it because right now it's
just not ready. Even short of that, like
I see companies that like I think of a
company like Workday that does a lot of
like what are called system of record
things, important things for employ like
employee, human resource, payroll and
that sort of thing. Small mistakes in
like payroll for instance have led to
class action lawsuits, you know, cuz
they compile and and end up there. And
again, like does an engineering team
want to vibe code a system that ends up
responsible for something like that at a
company? I kind of find that a bit of a
stretch.
>> Yeah, that and that won't happen. And I
think the area that investors worry
about, let's use a workday example. So
that you could use open AI or anthropic
to to effectively become an overlay. So
you onboard a number of new employees
and they want to go through training and
there's some training uh process module
that you would go through. Obviously
workday has systems like that, but they
could effectively do that on their own.
that that's an area where is there
incremental growth that's carved off and
that work day one get perhaps is that
safe it's safer because a training class
um to get to get up to speed on the
company's processes you could say well
that's that's less risk than than than
vibe coding a a payroll system and if
you look at the documentation that
openai has had on some of this they they
put system of record at the the bottom
of of their architectural diagram that
is a a big fear and I there are areas
where they have to figure this out. And
so I think that is a legitimate concern
for new applications, but they're still
going to grow. They're still going to
have uh to your to your point, they're
going to have we're going to have
payroll accounting, basic things that I
just don't think are going to get vioded
today. I and I think really what needs
to happen right now is you need Sam
Alman and OpenAI and Enthropic to come
public because if they come public,
they'll say, "Well, here's areas that we
want to compete. And here's areas that
we don't. Right now it's completely
everyone's guessing.
>> So Brent before this you mentioned that
you know this could be a moment for a
lot of M&A in software with valuations
being this low. There could be tie-ups
among software companies. There could be
um I think maybe some private equity
firms getting in there because there are
a lot of software specialist private
equity firms that have raised a lot of
capital. Um I wanted to turn it to Dan
first. Dan, you were talking earlier to
with me about how previous technological
changes drove consolidation in the
industry. Could you explain how that
happened in the past and maybe, you
know, talk a little bit about why you
think AI could be another moment? Well,
I think we saw when when you had this
transition from what's kind of called
what's called onrem, which is that that
older version of enterprise software
that lived on company servers and pre
pre-cloud um as cloud based software um
you know became started to grow into
like a real thing and a real disruptive
force um you started to see
consolidation of those companies.
Ironically, the company that
consolidated the most was Oracle. Oracle
kind of rolled up all these companies
and a lot of companies that did like
middleware space kind of consolidated
that onrem territory uh because we saw a
similar thing the valuations of those
companies were dropping the valuations
of the SAS cloud software were were
skyrocketing because that's where the
growth was. um as we see as we see this
question mark of like okay how does AI
affect these and you know how does it
does it um hurt like weaker players make
stronger players stronger and investors
trying to figure this out um we could
see I think another moment where um
because valuations are so low you know
yeah you might see private equity firms
come in depending on how they kind of
read the market um but it also might end
up proving to be an opportunity for the
larger companies to maybe roll up some
of the smaller ones like we saw in that
last cycle
What do you think, Brent? Do you think
we'll see an uptick in M&A in the
sector?
>> Massive M&A boom. Massive. One of the
biggest booms we've ever seen. And
here's why. Private equity has been
clogged for two years. They haven't been
able to do anything. And we know Tommo
Bravo and Vista have been very public
that this is oversold.
>> And they of course only buy software.
Those two firms. That's all they do.
PE's been been in a really tough spot
the last couple years and I think
ultimately with a valuation pullback
they have an opportunity to kind of
clean up the space. Second strate
>> and I wrote about I mean Tommo Bravo
raised $34 billion. They got a lot of
money to invest.
>> Massive.
>> Yeah. And this is go time. This is go
time that you know they're they're
talking about it and I think everyone
has said well why aren't they showing up
with action? So there's a lot of talk in
PE. Um we haven't seen the action. Um
but but again I don't I don't think that
they would go on and spend all the time
talking about this if they weren't going
to do it. So I think that's the first
area. Second is you've already seen a
lot of the industry you know the last
past IPOs cleaned up. You've seen IBM by
Confluent Hashi you've seen a number of
other transactions that have have
happened. uh we think the strategics are
going to be way more involved and IBM
for example has said this repeatedly
that they want to consolidate the space
there's a tremendous amount of
infrastructure companies they want to go
in so IBM has and will continue to be
very active I I think the third area is
given all the AI concern I think
investors will be will feel better about
platforms so what is the old saying in
software point solutions die platforms
Right. So you're going to see other
companies combine together and get
stronger and provide more insulation for
this AI storm. Uh so I I think this is
going to be a huge boom. I think the
other area too is
the rest of of the industry outside of
tech has talked about the importance of
software, right? You know, your watch is
no longer a watch. It's a connected
device that has everything on it. uh
your your glasses with Meta. Now you can
play music and take video and pictures.
Uh like they're not just glasses. So the
rest of the industry, you know, outside
of tech realizes the strategic
importance of of software. So I think
you're going to see some big deals in
manufacturing, automotive, and in other
areas. I mean, you look at Tesla, right?
It's that's a that's a software company
inside the car. That is not a it's not a
hardware company. So Bren, you and I you
and I have both been kind of uh watching
the space for a long time. So when I
talk about what's your take on that, you
know, what we learned from that past
transition to what what might apply now?
>> Yeah, it's a good good point. In past,
you know, you and I have seen the dot
bust, we've seen the great financial
crisis, we've seen the client server to
cloud movement, we've seen the deepseek
moment last year. And I' I'd say that a
lot of these um historic downdrafts have
created great buying opportunities. I
think the challenge with this situation
p uh versus the past 30 years is that
this is uh a specific technology shift
that is happening inside the industry
where it's actually eating its own
young. that you have this potential fear
of this virus that is literally coming
from the ground and is starting to erode
the actual value of what the industry
has been building for the last 30 years.
And I think that one is hard to uh
educate and and and actually see what's
going to happen in the next 10 years. I
I think again I think there are many
concerns that are over exaggerated that
we we believe we've talked about during
the session but I I think that most of
our clients are like I don't really know
what the true revenue and earnings power
of Adobe is in AI 3 years out. I don't
know I know what going to happen to
Microsoft's infrastructure business but
I'm not sure what's going to happen to
their application business. Right? If
Claude Co-work in 10 days recreated a
productivity app that small businesses
can use and it gets better and you add
these hardened features and security and
everything, could this be in use in 5
years by a larger enterprise and would
that threaten the the application
business at Microsoft which is obviously
a really big business and I think these
are the questions you can't really
answer today and but many of the top
leaders in the industry have said we
can't really answer them either. So if
the the top leaders can't answer them,
then how can we a as as the mass market
really answer these questions? And so I
think this is a this is definitely
different, but I think uh again the past
trends that we've seen where you've had
a massive downdraft. It's been a great
buying opportunity. I've said this on a
scale of 1 to 10, 10 being the most
negative, we're at about a nine. When we
come back, we'll have one final question
for Brent Thre.
>> Brent, I'm thinking about like as we're
talking about things that what it takes
to rebound. Um I I'm thinking that we're
coming into a new round of earnings
reports for a lot of these uh these
companies. What we saw a few weeks ago
is like in a case like Meta where they
were able to kind of show you know
revenue growth accelerating because
they're able to you know add in AI
features into their ad business and it's
already kind of showing some impact but
that's a much harder task for I think
for the way these companies are
structured to show that kind of like you
know more quicker near-term impact of
AI. So I'm thinking
is there is it even possible that for
this coming earnings flux of earnings
over the next few weeks is that really
going to um change the story you think
or do you think that just the sector
needs more time to to work on this
narrative?
>> We need more time. It's unfortunate that
I don't think this earning cycle is
going to going to solve the problems. I
think the as I mentioned this is a
multi-year concern and so one earnings
print isn't going to solve it. This is a
multi-year issue and this is why this a
weakness could persist longer than we
would all like and why embracing our our
clients to say um there's no rush to get
back in. And so we have an underweight
on software, we have an overweight on
infrastructure, we have an underweight
on applications. though our strategy has
been when you have this big a capex you
you're going to have to buy memory and
disc drives and land and energy and and
so we what we've advocated is that for
now and the next uh several quarters is
to be in those other sectors um and that
selectively there's great areas to own
but there was no rush and that we're now
seeing on our trading desk money leave
tech Overall, it's flowing out. You see
Walmart up almost 20%. You see gold up
almost 20%. You see Colgate up almost
20%. So, if I told you at the beginning
of the year, you could own the IGV or
the software index or you could own
Walmart, gold, and and and toothpaste.
Um, and you know, you would probably
based on how negative the sentiment was,
you probably would have taken software.
So software's down over 20 and those
collective safe areas are up 20. It's
incredible. So I think that
>> people just don't know where to turn and
they're looking for something safe.
>> They're going Yes, exactly. They're
rotating out attack. They're moving into
these these safe names where I have to
buy food. I think there are other
factors too, you know, are we going to
have a are we have a bigger war? Are we
going to what's happening with uh with
our e economic and political policy?
Like there are other forces that are at
work now that are forcing capital out.
And then obviously the big question we
haven't talked about is are we going to
hit an AI bust and is this all going to
pay off and are we going to see an ROI?
The conversations have been frustrating.
They've been not well founded with with
great fundamental analysis in my opinion
and that might just tell you we're
getting closer to the bottom than top.
But right now, I I've said sit it out,
wait for it to come through, and uh we
hopefully will have sunny sky sunnier
skies ahead. We're not we're not seeing
that today.
>> Well, it sounds like there could be a
good buying opportunity sometime soon.
We just don't know when that might be or
how much further we have to fall before
that happens. Brent, thank you so much
for joining us to help us dig through
these stocks. And Dan, thank you for
joining as well.
>> Great to be here.
>> Thanks for having me.
I I don't There's avalanche bombs and
phone calls and uh I thought it was in a
safe quiet zone here.